---
layout: post
title:  "Chit"
date:   2013-10-16 13:00:45 -0300
categories: opinion
---

There's a huge social stigma with (and really strong dispreference
for) the sound "sh" in Chile.

Those who pronounce the word "sh" (as the first phoneme in the English
word "show") are considered to be uneducated and thus have low social
status. Complementary, the voiceless fricative sound "ch" enjoys the
perks of a high social status sound. Thus, if you happen to say
"shile" you are looked upon as a low class individual (and,
scientifically speaking, dissed), while if you say "chile", everybody
looks at you in approval.

The problem with this is that there are so many English borrowings in
Chilean Spanish that the opposite situation also holds.  Uneducated
Chileans would say "vamos al show!" (which is correct), while educated
Chileans will say "vamos al chow" pronounced /tshou/, which is
incorrect.

So, going to go out on a limb here, we can say that if all words with
the "sh" and "ch" sounds are in sets A and B, respectively, each group
of people is pronouncing incorrectly A-B; that is, the complement of
what they pronouncing right. I do not care about the cardinality of
the sets, if |A|>0 and |B|>0, then I'm happy.

But now the "educated" people are between a rock and a hard place (the
uneducated people, I would assume, do not care one rat's ass)... they
can choose one and only one way to say a word to other people (yes,
the sequential nature of time when speaking is something we have yet
to overcome), meaning they will say either A or B in the wrong
way. But they will still look down on people who pronounce it
"differently"...

Rhetorical question (not meant to be answered, I really mean
rhetorical): how the fuck can they live with the paradox of looking
down on people who pronounce correctly words in a foreign language?

**Observations**: I am an educated person.  There are these entities
called "viejas cuicas" in Chile, something like "snob, posh ladies".

**Dependent variable**: I will, from now on, pronounce everything with
the "sh" sound, being wrong many times (each time I pronounce a word
in the B set) but right a few times (every time I pronounce a word in
the A set), assuming |A|<<|B|.

**Hypothesis**: The paradox of my being an educated person pronouncing
  words in B with the sound of those in A will ipso facto kill a vieja
  cuica of something close to a brain stroke.
